---
layout: post
title: On the state of the game
permalink: /blog/on-the-state-of-the-game/
---

There's been a bit of a riot on the Hearthstone subreddit lately. A critical
mass of complaints about the game, that's gotten several content producers
to contribute to the discussion and reveal that they, too, are burned out.

Hearthstone is popular largely thanks to Twitch and YouTube. A lot of players
discovered the game through Day[9], TotalBiscuit, Kripparian or other Twitch
streamers. It is a really fun game to watch, and has almost zero barrier of
entry. When those people start saying they are burned out with the game, a
lot of players, themselves likely burned out, will also realize that they are
not actually playing for fun anymore.

Let's do a bit of introspection, though, and figure out why this is happening.

Last month, the famed Grim Patron deck was hit by a nerf to Warsong Commander.
This came after over half a year of that deck continuously being the absolute
best deck in the meta. Players were overjoyed.
A second round of discontent immediately came about when players realized that
Warsong Commander would now be unplayable. Not only is it a basic card (and
therefore one of the few cards new players have access to, which impacts the
barrier of entry), but it's a **Warrior** basic card, giving it a bonus 100%
chance to be offered as an arena pick — and the Warrior class is currently, by
far, the worst in arena.

Some pros correctly predicted what was going to happen next: The rise of the
Secret Paladin deck. A deck which was already popular, but was naturally being
kept at bay with Grim Patron. There ensued a truly, truly frustrating ladder
experience.

I find this entire situation fascinating. The most anticipated nerf in the game
resulting in a fallout the likes we haven't seen before. In the end, the meta
is exactly what the players make of it. If the majority of players are finding
Secret Paladin to be successful, you would think the meta would stabilize on
counters (which absolutely exist - my recent grind to legend was on the back of
a 75% winrate against that deck). After all, the meta always hovers around 50%
winrate.

A fear that Secret Paladin might become the next Grim Patron and Hearthstone
would be stale for another 6 months installed itself. Of course, that's not
actually true; Blizzard has several adventures and expansions lined up, one of
which will most likely be announced at BlizzCon. But it highlights exactly what
the root issue is: the lack of interactivity between the players and the devs.

I personally find Team 5 far more communicative than the other teams at
Blizzard… or at least, I used to. Ben Brode and Yong Woo have both stopped
being as vocal as they used to be. Anyone who's worked in game development will
understand why, but communication is extremely important. Even if what you say
is not always well-received, it's better to disagree than to feel ignored.

Communication, of course, is not just fancy YouTube videos talking about the
soul of a card. It's also changes to the game. A large factor in the current
frustrations is how a digital game is not receiving any balance changes, unlike
other Blizzard games. Physical TCGs can't easily change existing cards, a
limitation which Blizzard has decided to implement in their design. A strange
decision, which isn't necessarily *bad* — ping-pong balancing, as I like to
call it and as World of Warcraft players will be familiar with, is really no
better.
There is a middle-ground. The Heroes of the Storm team releases patches on just
about the same frequency as Team 5, but balance changes are far more common.
More than that though, the patch notes are exhaustive and *every change* comes
with [extensive design notes](http://us.battle.net/heroes/en/blog/19893628).

I wish Hearthstone would get that. The deeper issue is very real: The digital
nature of the game is not being appropriately embraced. Tavern Brawls are nice,
but how about custom game modes for duels? How about replays? Seed rematches?
[How about taking a page from Psyonix's book?](http://blog.us.playstation.com/2015/10/28/mix-match-and-mutate-in-rocket-league-this-november/)
Rocket League actually fascinates me and I expect to play it more often. A
healthy community and friendly devs is such a wonderful aspect of good games.

Personally, I'll keep working on Hearthstone. I love the game *because* of the
possibilities which Blizzard is very sadly not embracing. But it has been a
very long time since I actually enjoyed playing it. Even the dailies are not
enjoyable, especially when you compare them to Heroes of the Storm's dailies
which focus on playing rather than winning.

Looking forward to BlizzCon announcements. Hopefully, one of them will address
these issues.

Jerome
